Thank you. Thank you friends. Thank you friends. Welcome. Yay. Here we are again. What a fortune.
What a really supreme fortune. So as we usually do, we'll reconnect with the ground, which
is the path, which is the fruition, really activate our bodhicitta motivation. We do
that with a tremendous sense of our own preciousness and worthiness and dignity and the goodness
of all beings. And then we extend that natural compassion to each of those beings who are
so special and so important. We're all going through so many ups and downs, so many gains
that we don't like, so many losses that we don't like. So extend that heartfelt genuine
compassion to each of these beings. And then really connecting to that dignity, that inherent
goodness of oneself, of all beings, have this pure perception, kind of, you know, without
any doubt or hesitation, just kind of see that clearly. One's own goodness, the essential
extraordinary nature of life, of awareness, this vivid richness that we get to experience
right now with all these sights and sounds and smells and tastes, like really kind of
just be with what's happening right now. Connect to that motivation, renunciation, bodhicitta,
pure perception, kind of let that be everything right now.
So the topic for today is merit, purification, and receiving blessings. So this is the topic
of merit, purification, and receiving blessings. There's a lot here. And I've thought different
things about this session, and it's kind of open. I'm very kind of curious about what's
going to happen today. So I thought to begin, if we each bring to mind a special moment
we've shared with our teacher, whether that's Venerable Kenshin, Paldencher, Bernbuchet,
Venerable Kenpo, Séo, Ondonio, Bernbuchet, some other great teacher that we just treasure
that's so special to us, try to really bring to mind a memory of some time we had with
them where they really kind of were showing us such kindness. I want to take a minute and
we'll just kind of silently like try to activate whatever that memory is for you. Really connect
to that, feel that, let yourself really fully sense it. Where was it? What was happening?
What was said? What was the look? What do you remember about it? So kind of really let's
all take a minute and really feel that kindness, that specialness from our encounter with the
teacher. [ Pause ]
[ Silence ]
Whether the Dharma stays alive for us is up to us.
If you've had the great opportunity to be in the presence of one of these noble realized beings.
[ Silence ]
And that connection's there.
And it's up to us to keep that alive.
[ Silence ]
Isn't that called empowerment?
Isn't that personal freedom?
[ Silence ]
It is up to us if the Dharma is going to be something alive in our lives or not.
We are the ones who have to keep choosing it.
[ Silence ]
It's our path.
We have the full power to continue on our path.
And it's not the role of our teacher to make us take the next step.
That's not the teacher's job.
The teacher's job is to show us the path.
And when we need help, that they help us however we're available to be helped.
That's the teacher's job.
They're not a god.
And they care for us so much.
It's alive for them.
They keep caring.
Their heart is opened.
Their mind is clear.
They can't not care.
It's impossible for them to turn that off anymore.
They're just waiting.
It's up to us to tune in to that compassion.
We have a warm connection.
We're the ones who have to feel it.
If we don't feel it, we're the ones that have to generate it.
We're the ones that have to create conditions that have it happen.
And these teachers are so kind.
They keep helping providing these conditions for us.
But they can't make us do it.
They have to take the next step, every single step.
How patient these masters are.
Merit, purification, receiving blessings.
All of this is up to us.
They can't rely on all of these lineage masters in their quotes today.
And we'll kind of free-flow in between that.
And Toko Urjinibiche, repeating the words of the Buddha.
If we want to quickly awaken to Buddhahood, it is essential to unite means and knowledge.
Whatever conceptual practice we do should ideally be combined with the recognition of mind essence.
Devotion and compassion are the heart of conceptual dharma practice.
The great masters of the Kagu lineage state that it is delusion to count on any method for
recognizing mind essence
other than purifying obscurations, gathering the accumulations, and relying on the blessings of a
realized master.
This means that no matter how smart or strong we are, if we don't follow a master,
and instead stubbornly push ourselves through years of meditation training,
without developing compassion and devotion, purifying obscurations, and gathering the accumulations
, we will remain deluded.
The essence of both devotion and compassion is actually the same. It is a kind of love.
Whether that feeling is directed towards enlightened pure beings or ordinary impure beings,
whether it is devotion or compassion, the essence remains the same.
The mind is laid bare of thoughts at the moment the empty essence dons nakedly and can be directly
perceived.
In the Kagu lineage, devotion is always said to be the main quality to focus on,
and so the Kagu lineage is called the lineage of devotion.
But compassion or devotion are the same in facilitating the realization of mind essence.
To reiterate, our training in devotion, compassion, purifying the obscurations,
and gathering the accumulations should be combined with recognizing our mind essence.
Otherwise, to reach enlightenment using means without knowledge takes a tremendously long time,
three eons according to the Sutra Path. The Vajrayana Path is much more swift.
Merit, purification, receiving blessings.
There are so many ways to talk about these three topics.
We accumulate merit with mandala offering.
We purify our obscurations with Vajrasattva practice.
We receive blessings through guru yoga practice.
And actually, each of these practices and all of the other ones in Nandro do all of these at the
same time too.
We can think of them kind of separately if that's helpful, and it's fine. Whatever is helpful is
helpful.
Today, I thought to look at them more in terms of merit and purifying and receiving accomplishments
,
like receiving the blessings and achieving the accomplishment.
This is more in terms of getting to the point. What's up to us, this path, taking the next step?
What's preventing it? If we look straight up Dharma, what's preventing it?
Self-absorption, self-cherishing, me, me, me, me, me, me, me, ego clinging.
This is the teaching, purifying obscurations. What does it mean? Removing negative habits,
accumulating merits.
What does it mean? Creating positive habits, receiving the blessings. What does it mean?
Non-habitual naturalness. This is the teaching of the Buddha, right?
At the end of every Dharmapala practice we do at PBC, we recite these four lines.
Do virtuous deeds, avoid all negative activity, tame your own mind. This is a teaching of the
Buddha.
Why do we even say that? Because we've asked all these beings to come for Dharmapala practice.
Some are enlightened and some are not. These four lines are said to encompass the entire path of
Buddhism, the entire teaching.
So for beings of higher faculties that are really ready, that are really tuned in, that are really
available to be moved and transformed by the Dharma, this is all they need.
Don't do bad things, do good things, tame your mind. So we say this, in case any of those highly
attuned beings are around, we say that because it's the full 84,000 teachings.
So for those beings who've come, we ask them to come. Maybe this time they hear the full Dharma
turning, just by us parroting it, just we say it.
Maybe it clicks on in their mind and they achieve accomplishment. Why? Because that's what happens
when we're finally tuned in to the Dharma.
There's so many teachings on this. This is merit, purification, receiving blessings. This is how we
let ourselves be moved by the Dharma.
If in the beginning, if we've had all these experiences with our teachers, right? So if you've had
a great opportunity to be around these great teachers, then you have some memories, you know?
Okay? So when we remember it, does it move us? And if it doesn't move us, why not? Ego clinging.
There's a million reasons to describe ego clinging. The infinite.
The path is devotion and compassion to the two fields of merit, devotion to those above, the freed
beings, the noble ones, compassion to those at our level or below, sentient beings, we're all
drowning in samsara.
That's the whole path, devotion, compassion, because that's all the beings there are, the free ones
and the trapped ones.
And we're trying to have a warm connection to all of them, because for Mahayana Buddhists, they're
both equally important.
Kim Bo Rinpoche went over this last week in his winter Dzogchen retreat webcast teaching on Paltra
Rinpoche's fifth instructions, two fields of merit.
If we don't have that close connection, that close warm feeling, that's because of me.
At some point in Dharma practice, it has to come down to that point.
Specially for Mahayana bodhisattvas. There's no way around it. You're going to wait for everyone to
be nice to us, and then we're going to try to practice.
Please give me a break. That's called eight worldly concerns. Everyone has to love me before I love
them. Give me a break.
That's called ego clinging. That's called self-absorption.
You love me first, then I love you. Is that what these noble beings teach us to do?
And if we don't have that close, loving, connected feeling, then we have to nourish it.
And we have to open, and we have to ask for help, and we have to do what's helpful to make that
happen.
The more we feel isolated, separated, closed off, distant, shut down, brittle, reactive, this is
what happens.
We create this big gap of space around us, and then we wonder why doesn't anyone want to play with
me? If we build a moat around us, how can they?
How do we put some bridges out there? Marry it. Do good things. Be nice. Try to get in their shoes.
What are they going through?
Purify the obscurations. Remove what's blocking that. Oh, the constant chain of delusion, right?
That person's this, that person's that, this, this, this, this happened to me, and it's so bad, and
bad, bad, bad, bad, bad, bad, bad.
Is this pure perception? Is this bodhisattva? Is this Shravaka-yana, foundational Buddhism?
No, it's not Buddhism at all. It's just self-absorption. It's not a spiritual anything. It's just
narcissism.
Everyone, we're in that, me, me, me, me, me, the center, I'm everything. The Buddha clearly stated
that's the central problem of samsaric existence.
The root of, the root of it all. The fundamental felt sense of belief in me. Me, not you.
This is the teaching, right? I mean, if we're really going to take dharma seriously, we can't only
want peaceful Buddhas.
Everything has to be nice, and then I'll practice. Everyone has to agree, and then I'll practice.
Everyone has to look beautiful, and then I'll see them as a deity. This is not Buddhism at all. At
all.
We're just letting ego-clinging, ego-clinging run the show.
As always, due to Rinpoche, counsels for my heart. These are general guidelines for worldly conduct
, worldly, non-dharmic, worldly conduct.
And then counsels for my heart, magical nectar. Such a famous, so profound. All success, great and
small, whether in spiritual or temporal affairs, derives from your stock of merit.
So never neglect even the slightest positive deed. Just do it. In the same way, don't dismiss your
little faults as unimportant. Just restrain yourself.
Make an effort to accumulate merit. Make offerings and give to charity. Strive with a good heart to
do everything that benefits others.
Follow in the footsteps of the wise and carefully examine everything you do. Do not be the slave of
unexamined fashions. Be sparing with your words.
Be thoughtful and examine situations carefully. For the roots of discrimination must be nourished.
The desire to do all that should be done and to abandon all that should be abandoned.
Do not criticize the wise or be sarcastic about them. Rid yourself completely of every feeling of
jealous rivalry.
Do not despise the ignorant turning away from them with haughty arrogance. Give up your pride. Give
up your self-importance. All this is essential.
Understand that you owe your life to the kindness of your parents. Therefore, do not grieve them
but fulfill their wishes. Show courtesy and consideration to all who depend on you.
Instill in them a sense of goodness and instruct them to practice virtue and avoid evil. Be patient
with their little shortcomings and restrain your bad temper.
Remember that the tiniest thing can ruin a good situation. Do not consort with narrow-minded people
nor place your trust in new and untried companions.
Make friends with honest people who are intelligent and prudent and have a sense of propriety and
courtesy. Don't keep company with bad people who care nothing about karma.
Those who lie and cheat and steal. Distance yourself but do it skillfully. Do not rely on people
who say sweet things to your face and do the reverse behind your back.
As for yourself, be constant amid the ebb and flow of happiness and suffering. Be friendly and even
with others. Unguarded, intemperate chatter will put you in their power.
Excessive silence may leave them unclear as to what you mean. Keep a middle course. Don't swagger
with self-confidence but don't be a doormat either.
Don't run after gossip without examining the truth of it. People who know how to keep their mouths
shut are rare. So don't chatter about your wishes and intentions. Keep them to yourself.
And whether you're speaking to an enemy, an acquaintance, or a friend, never break a confidence. Be
welcoming towards people and smile and talk pleasantly.
Keep to your position. Be respectful toward your superiors. And even when things do not go well for
them, don't scorn them.
At the same time, don't bow and scrape before the vulgar, even when they are proud and full of
themselves. Be skillful. Do not make promises that you know you cannot keep.
By the same token, honor the promises you have made and never dismiss them as unimportant. Do not
be depressed by misfortune and the failure to get what you want.
Instead, be careful to see where your real profit and loss lie. All such worldly conduct, adopted
with proper discrimination, will result in this life's fortune and prosperity.
And so it is said, a speedy passage to the divine realms.
This is how to be a good, worldly person. He goes on to talk about what being a good Dharma person
is.
That's the standard for a really good, non-Dharma person who just wants to have a nice life.
This is assumed that we're trying to do this as Dharma people. We have to be like this.
This is Holiness Dhujharma Chay's personal advice.
There's so many points of advice there.
Counsels from my heart.
I don't need to say anything more than that. You can't say much. Why comment on some things that
are so incredibly direct and profound and obvious.
Just common sense obvious. Hard to do, but obvious.
Okay, so then what about the Dharma part? Because that was not Dharma. That was just basic good
conduct as a common citizen of the world. That's the standard.
Okay, what about the Dharma part? Not for happiness.
The first step towards training the mind is repeatedly to recognize and reflect on the futility of
Samsaric life.
As we've already seen, to continue to value any part of worldly life creates a loophole in our
fundamental attitude that will eventually compromise our Dharma practice.
It is important, and therefore, to recognize the pointlessness of worldly activity, material
possessions, and relationships.
And as we have already seen, contemplating the four foundations is a very good method for vividly
bringing to mind just how terminally barren Samsara really is.
Even though the Dharma contains a vast treasury of extraordinary teachings, we can accumulate
tremendous merit merely by listening to teachings on these four thoughts or contemplations over and
over again.
This is called a common nundra. This is the four points that we recite. It's the four points that
we yawn about when they're brought up again.
How do you put that down? There can be the nice, peaceful way to say this and the really direct way
to say this.
The peaceful way to say this is care enough for yourself that you don't involve yourself in just
trash.
Actually care enough about yourself to not just get caught up in the muck of some Sariq power trips
.
You're worth more than that. Love yourself that much. That's the peaceful side.
The more direct side is samsara only takes. It doesn't give back anything. As much as we invest in
making samsara good for me, we lose.
It's just straight up fact. We try to make a nice cozy corner in samsara. The end is suffering.
That's the more direct one. Aren't they both loving? Don't hate yourself. Don't expect things that
are untrue and in that way cause yourself all this unnecessary suffering.
Aren't those both loving? That's like the sweet advice of a kind parent who's been there and done
that. They know.
But what can they do? They just show us the path. That's all they can do. They can't live our lives
for us.
So now that's like a now we're in a Dharma context. We've seen the importance of merit purification
and receiving blessings.
We've established that what it's generally like to be a good person. Now we've established a
foundation of what has to be there as a bedrock for be a Dharma person in addition to a good person
.
In addition, be a Dharma person.
So what's a merit? And this is from Kambaramiche's book, Illuminating the Path. This is their
commentary on Dijam Terasar Nandro.
This is like a stock filled with all these precious teachings. So this is Venerable Kambaramiches.
In the Nandro practice, we use two mandalas. The first mandala is called the wisdom mandala or the
accomplishment mandala.
Within this limitless mandala, the true nature is already perfect and the accumulations of merit
and wisdom are completely accomplished from the beginning.
By understanding the wisdom mandala, we connect with the primordial nature of enlightenment and
experience the entire universe as the play of the three vajras.
Vajra body, vajra speech and vajra mind. Whatever we see is the indestructible display of the
wisdom body.
Whatever we hear is the unceasing speech of the Buddhas. Whatever we think is indistinguishable
from the essence of enlightenment.
The wisdom mandala of accomplishment symbolizes the totality of phenomena viewed from the vantage
point of the awakened mind.
By using the accomplishment mandala to contemplate the true nature, our meditation becomes free of
dualistic notions that mistakenly separate the meditation and the meditator.
The second mandala we use in Nandro practice is the offering mandala or the accumulation mandala.
Because by offering this mandala, we accumulate merit and wisdom.
We need the energy of merit as well as wisdom to actualize our Buddha nature.
To understand why this is so, consider how all our experiences develop according to the qualities
of our actions.
All change happens due to specific causes and conditions.
In order to awaken an understanding of our enlightened nature, we need competent assistance and
auspicious connections.
We already have the perfect cause, which is Buddha nature, so we need the supporting secondary
conditions that come through the accumulation of merit.
By skillfully applying the six paramitas, we can merge all our activities with the primordial
nature of mind, which is symbolized by the accomplishment mandala.
This is the way to cultivate our Buddha seed so that it blossoms into Buddhahood.
There's the already perfect wisdom mandala, and if we don't see that, there's the conceptualization
that we generate in order to see that non-conceptual, already present, fully actualized wisdom mand
ala.
That's called merit. Conceptual habits do good within this bodhicitta framework.
So then it's not just the result, "We don't get a worldly good thing," but it actually becomes
something beneficial for all beings.
In that same other book, Not for Happiness, he says, "Marit happens whenever we do something that's
not filtered through dualistic mind." That's merit.
It could be doing the laundry. It could be anything.
If we're not grasping too much on our own idea, if we kind of release that and let experience
happen and we engage the activities, then that activity becomes merit.
What is merit? It's what life is like when it's not being experienced through self-absorption.
That's merit. Everything we do that's not filtered through the troublemaker, ego-ghost, self-
important ego-ghost, that's merit.
It's just constantly we can generate merit, and then there's more formal ways of doing this, like
offering mandala to this refuge tree of enlightened wisdom beings.
They're a field of merit, and then we can do all these good things for sentient beings because they
're a field of merit.
Everything can be a meritorious activity, depending on our view. Again, it's up to me.
Every single thing I do could be merit. It's really up to me, my mind, tame my own mind.
And then purification. Again, illuminating the path by Venerable Kamparimache's purification
practice.
The phrase "from the beginning, free of all extremes and complexities" describes the true nature of
mind.
Everything arises as a relative transformation of that pure, absolute condition.
When we dissolve the deity, it's like returning to the original, all-pervading state, which is free
from divisions into times and directions.
There's no partiality in the heart of perfect wisdom.
Dissolving into the primordial nature represents a big step forward on the path of the bodhisattva.
The true nature is free of any duality, such as birth and death, inner and outer, or existence and
non-existence.
All limitations are transcended in the innate condition.
So we practice merging back into that nature, relaxing into it without any limitation.
This is known as practicing on the absolute vadrasattva, inseparable from the teacher.
So this is absolute purification.
And then relatively, we're removing those habits we have that we created that block us from
connecting to absolute vadrasattva, which is our own nature, right here, right now.
Again, the nature is here now, and the teachers and these great masters are pointing that to us
again and again.
It's here right now.
It's you right now, already.
But they can't make our mind see it for ourselves.
That's why you can't give someone wisdom.
The aha moment has to come from one's own side.
You can set up all the secondary causes and conditions.
But when our Buddha nature has to attune to the causes and conditions, otherwise there's no
reception.
There's no softening.
There's no curiosity.
There's no willingness to be moved, to be changed.
We're impenetrable.
We're stuck.
We're fixed.
We're shelled off.
The cocoon of ego clinging.
It's so kind of odd.
We're cocooning around something that's limitless and pure.
It's really odd.
We're so used to holding like this that when someone's like, "It's okay. Just relax. Just relax. It
's okay. It's okay."
Then we just go right back into locking.
So this is going to take time.
It takes time.
Each step, each step, each step, each step.
Gentle, gentle, we need to have the worldly conduct and the Dharma Foundation to turn our minds
toward the Dharma
and to do these activities to generate merit, this positive energy, our own positive qualities to
grow them.
And then we need to stop growing the negative ones, reduce them eventually, like just don't keep
feeding them.
That's the path.
And then all the path comes down to this, receiving the blessings.
All the teachings come to this point, receiving the blessings.
So we'll go again to His Holiness, Dujum Rinpoche.
In his book, the commentary on Dujum Tersar Nundro is "Torch Lighting the Way to Freedom."
These are all treasure troves.
If we only had one of these books, that was it. That's all we had for the rest of our lives. That's
it.
Then it'd be enough, each of them. That's such fortune.
The teacher is the embodiment of all the Buddhas, the root of blessings, the source of
accomplishment, the foundation of activities.
Moreover, as far as we are concerned, the teacher is much kinder than all the Buddhas.
Why is this? Because at this time, when we do not have good fortune to see the Buddha in person or
listen to Him teach,
our teacher is the dominant condition for the Buddha's activity penetrating us,
the link through which we can actually see the Buddha in the absolute body, the Dharmakaya Buddha.
In this respect, the teacher's kindness is inconceivable, and for this reason, our teacher is
definitely superior to all of the Buddhas.
As we read in the Sutra of Immaculate Space, Ananda, the tatagatas are not visible to all beings,
but spiritual friends, being fully visible, teach the Dharma and plant the seed of liberation.
For this reason, consider the spiritual friend as more important than the tatagatas.
This is particularly true here in the mantra vehicle, where all the deities reside of the mandala,
where all the deities of the mandala are embodied in the Diamond Master's body, speech, and mind,
and it is on account of this that such teachers benefit beings.
So if we disrespectfully scorn them, or respectfully make offerings to them,
we will be doing the same to all the infinite deities of the mandalas.
The benefits and dangers, therefore, are both much greater than in the other vehicles.
And this only goes on to say, next page.
Whether our teachers present in person are ordinary beings or emanations of Buddhas and Bodhisatt
vas,
if we are able to pray to them, considering them as the Buddha,
there is absolutely no difference between them and the Buddha or Bodhisattva or Yiddam deity in
person,
because the source of blessings is devotion.
So whichever profound practice we are undertaking, whether the generation phase or the perfection
phase,
we should begin by making the teachers' blessings the path.
There is no more to it than that.
But as long as we have not received the blessings, we will not be genuinely on the path.
It is said that if disciples who keep the commitments give themselves wholeheartedly with devotion
to an authentic diamond master,
they will obtain the supreme and common accomplishments, even if they have no other methods.
But without devotion to the teacher, even if we complete the approach and accomplishment practices
of the Yiddams of the six Tantra sections,
we will never obtain the supreme accomplishment.
And we will be unlikely to accomplish many of the ordinary accomplishments either,
such as those of long life, wealth, or bringing beings under one's power.
Even if we do manage to achieve a little, it will have necessitated a lot of hardship and will have
nothing to do with the profound path.
When unmistaken devotion takes birth in us, obstacles on the path will be dispelled and we will
make progress,
obtaining all the supreme and ordinary accomplishments without depending on anything else.
This is what we mean by the profound path of Guru Yoga.
That's his only institution, Rinpoche.
The Turtan who discovered this Dijamtara Sarnandra from his wisdom mind.
We're just repeating the words of the Buddhas.
That's the best we can do.
That's what all the lineage masters do.
We're just repeating the words and trying to really let ourselves connect with that profound
meaning that those words carry.
To be really open, to be moved and transformed by the really noble words whose sole intention is to
liberate us and all beings from all the samsaric traps that we've set for ourselves.
If any of these words cause you to lock up and shut down and turn off or push away,
is my humble request, please look at that kindly.
Love yourself enough to really look at that response.
All these quotes I've said today, they're repeated throughout all these teachings.
We're not going to find something better.
There might be something that for me in this moment, I'm more available for it.
And so for me in this moment, it helps me settle down and it helps my Buddha nature to shine up on.
And in that way, I'm ready for that.
But just because I'm ready to see this much doesn't mean there's not a lot more to see.
And we should get really curious about why am I holding like this when reality is like this.
And if this is protection, this is a really big point, gompo, protection.
We pay homage to the protector.
Having a wall can be the most important thing we do.
Or it can be the worst decision we make.
What are we keeping out?
What are we letting in?
Is the protection helping my Buddha nature shine?
Is it preventing my Buddha nature to shine?
That's just a question we have to ask ourselves again and again and again on the path.
And that's what Drimp of Mindfulness is all about.
Is my Buddha nature shining because I'm holding, I'm poised in this way?
Because holding isn't the problem.
Being unable to change our grip is the problem.
We have to hold.
Positive habits, positive holding.
Negative habits means a grip that no longer helps.
It's hurting, so we have to release it.
And eventually we relax and we can free flow between the different optimal stances and grips
and ways of engaging and responding and being silent and emerging.
And why will we do that to really serve beings?
Because we just love them.
And we love ourselves that much.
And the proper protection, like the actual noble protectors,
their only interest is for us to keep on the path, to keep going.
And we have to be real clear, too, to protect ourself, to look for ourself.
Is this helping me take the next step on my path or not?
And that's just a genuine question that every Dharma practitioner has to keep asking themselves.
Is this helping me take the next step on my path so that my vodhicitta is a little brighter?
Or is it preventing that?
Thank you, friends.
We'll kind of kindly put ourselves in this container of the nundra practice now,
which we're so incredibly fortunate to have.
So under the protection of that mandala, this wisdom mandala of the enlightened nature
that's been so directly pointed out to us by these enlightened masters,
we'll kind of connect up with that and tune in to their wisdom blessings.
And we'll kind of follow in their footsteps
by applying their teachings and seeing for ourselves if they really help us.
And I think we'll see that they really very much do.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, friends.
Thank you, friends.
Thank you.
I feel like I'm really trying my best to really deeply appreciate and value
and honor the fullness and the richness and the complexity of being a human being.
It's so extraordinarily rich and reality is so rich.
And I really I'm really trying to do my best.
And there's so many ways that we can we can flourish.
And there's so many ways that we can mend and we can transform
and we can display our creative beauty and communicate and dance
and grieve and love and the whole gamut of all of it.
The mind is so amazing.
I'm a really big fan of the full spectrum of humans, of mind, of sentience
and all the different ways that we can like really creatively engage this
and like use this and love this and love ourselves and love each other
and love our bodies and love our companions and relationships
and friends and communities and nations and planets.
I really I'm genuinely I really I feel like I feel that way
and I'm really trying to kind of offer that a little bit.
And so similarly the the Buddha's teachings are so vast
and there's teachings to tame our mind and teachings to train our minds
and teachings to recognize our minds.
Sutra, Mayana, Tantra and there's peaceful teachings that are so soothing
and nourishing and there's semi-peaceful semi-wrathful teachings
that are kind of activating but still a little bit playful
and there's wrathful teachings that are just direct
and just like mirror like clarity.
And there's this full range of the Buddha's teachings
and I think it's a great service definitely in my experience
and I hope for you to this is all preparation
to allow our other fullness of ourselves to come out to express
we're like surveying the fullness of these methods we have
and it's like it's fine if we get we have to really appropriately queue in
and line up with what's helpful for me now
and in my situation with what's going on and who's around me
that's so critically important
but it's also really good preparation as bodhisattvas, aspiring bodhisattvas
what's the full range of all these other ways that people operate
that the things that people are going through that's not in my sphere right now
but like things I can queue in and learn about and get curious about
so maybe when it comes up for me later I'm going to be a little more prepared
or when I see someone else and they're going through it
I'm a little more prepared like to be kind to really be with someone
so like I feel if we ever get too cozy in our little corner of anything
there's so much of the fullness of life and of ourselves
we start just shutting off and shutting out and shutting down around
and like that's always I'm always really kind of a little hesitant when I do that
and it's just very as a bodhisattva commitment that we're saying
may all until samsara is empty may I personally be the one
to serve and uplift and free every single other being that's been so kind to me
so really that fullness I mean just really honoring that richness
that like right here and now we have to care like very locally
with a lot of clarity and detail and lightness as much as we can
but really hold it within a really big view like otherwise
we're going to shut out a lot of the richness of reality
and we're going to kind of basically limit how skillful we can be
with all these other things going on around us
so I say that one I hopefully I didn't like mistakenly present some teachings
but I know also I can be on the more like kind of direct intense side too
and so I mean also I can be on the soft little squishy crying side too
so I'm trying to offer my full range of meanness okay
please don't hurt me love you all thank you bye